# Solving Lunar Lander with (D)DQN

## Problem Definition

The problem of this assignment is called the Lunar Lander and simulates landing a small rocket on the moon surface. The
environment for testing the algorithm is freely available on the
[Gymnasium](https://gymnasium.farama.org) web site (it's an actively
maintained fork of the original [OpenAI
Gym](https://github.com/openai/gym) developed by Oleg Klimov.

The [Lunar Lander](https://gymnasium.farama.org/environments/box2d/lunar_lander/)
is a classic rocket trajectory optimisation problem ([comprehensive
environment description is found on the gymnasium web
site](https://gymnasium.farama.org/environments/box2d/lunar_lander/) ).
In the simulation, the spacecraft has a main engine and two lateral
boosters that can be used to control its descent and the orientation of
the spacecraft. The spacecraft is subject to the moon's gravitational
pull, and the engines have an unlimited amount of fuel. The spacecraft
must navigate to the landing spot between two flags at coordinates (0,0)
without crashing. Landing outside of the landing pad is possible. The
lander starts at the top center of the viewport with a random initial
force applied to its center of mass. The environment has 4 discrete
actions:

-   0: do nothing
-   1: fire left orientation engine
-   2: fire main engine
-   3: fire right orientation engine

The state is an 8-dimensional vector: the coordinates of the lander in x
& y, its linear velocities in x & y, its angle, its angular velocity,
and two booleans that represent whether each leg is in contact with the
ground or not.

After every step a reward is granted. The total reward of an episode is
the sum of the rewards for all the steps within that episode.

For each step, the reward:

-   is increased/decreased the closer/further the lander is to the
    landing pad.
-   is increased/decreased the slower/faster the lander is moving.
-   is decreased the more the lander is tilted (angle not horizontal).
-   is increased by 10 points for each leg that is in contact with the
    ground.
-   is decreased by 0.03 points each frame a side engine is firing.
-   is decreased by 0.3 points each frame the main engine is firing.

The episode receive an additional reward of -100 or +100 points for
crashing or landing safely respectively. An episode is considered a
solution if it scores at least 200 points. The episode finishes if the
lander crashes, flies outside of the viewport of stops moving.

# Background

The lunar lander environment features a relatively big, continuous state
space. This already narrows down the selection of the appropriate
algorithms to those families of algorithms that don't assume the perfect
knowledge of the environment, e.g. dynamic programming would most likely
not be feasible since it would not be possible to efficiently estimate
the state-value function. Monte-Carlo methods on the other hand don't
require the perfect knowledge of the environment and learn from the
agent's experiences. They would therefore be a more suitable candidate
for a large state space. However a drawback of Monte Carlo methods is
that they require a full completed episode to learn and so the
convergence might be too slow to efficiently solve the problem.
Additionally they need to store the action-value function and the
complete list of returns for every episode in memory and would
potentially require lots of space. Another family of methods are the
Temporal-difference methods which solve the first drawback of the
Monte-Carlo methods and can learn at every step since they make use of
bootstrapping while still relying on agent's experiences like the
Monte-Carlo methods. Therefore the agent can improve even before
reaching the goal state which is an important aspect for environments
like Lunar Lander where an agent might take many steps before reaching a
goal. Q-learning is one such algorithm, that is also is an off-policy
method so it isn't limited to learning the policy it's following while
learning the optimal policy. The speed of convergence of the Q-learning
can be further improved up by remembering past state transitions and
simulating moves and thus speeding up the learning process as in the
Dyna-Q algorithm. All of the mentioned methods however have one thing in
common. They assume a finite state and action space and therefore can
rely on tabular representation of the Q-value estimate. In order to
scale past the finite number of states even to improve the performance
of agents in environments with a large number of states a function
approximation for the state-value function can be used instead. One such
method was used by the DeepMind that learned to play Atari games by
using a neural network as a function approximator. This way the size of
the state space does not matter any more a problem since we have no Q
table that needs to be maintained in the memory. The agent still learns
from experiences as in the MC and TD methods and is not limited to
completing an episode. In this project two such algorithms were tested
on the Lunar Lander problem, DQN with one and DQN with two neural
networks.

# Method

To solve the Lunar Lander problem two very similar deep RL methods were
used. Deep Q-learning (DQN) is essentially a Q-learning algorithm with
an approximation of the Q-value function that receives a state as an
input and returns actions with their q-values instead of the old tabular
Q-value function that simply maps a state-action pair to a Q value. A
neural network is used here as a function approximator. In the case of a
DQN a single neural network is used for two important steps, choosing
agent's actions as well as for evaluating the target Q values. This can
lead to a so-called maximisation bias which means that a maximum over
estimated values is used implicitly as an estimate of the maximum value.
A further example of such a bias is provided in Sutton and Barto (2018,
p.134) which illustrates situations in which a wrong action would be
chosen by an agent due to this effect. To overcome this challenge an
improved version of a DQN is such that a separate neural network is
added for updating the target values. This second neural network has the
same shape and architecture as the one used for the action-selection and
is periodically updated with the weights of the action-selection
network. Such reduced frequency of updates to the target network means
that the target values it is aiming at stay more stationary. Therefore
the improvements to the action-selection network should be more
efficient and we should see the agent converge faster and learn more
robustly.

# Results

Both algorithms (DQN and DDQN) converged after a couple of hundred
episodes (the point of convergence is the when the average of the last
100 episodes exceeds 200 points). The best performing approach out of
those tested was a DDQN with a neural network featuring two hidden
layers of size 256 neurons and RELU activation function, batch size of
128 and the replay memory of 200000 transitions. It was trained on 1500
episodes and converged in the 369th episode as seen in the figure
[1](#fig:1){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:1"} (the red colour in
the graph indicates the point where the average of the past 200 episodes
exceeded 200 points and the line is marked with red colour from that
point onwards.). The final result of the agent landing the rocket using
this model can be seen by playing the following videos (trained vs
untrained agent):

-   [Video of the best performing agent landing the rocket on the moon
    (experiment M5) ](https://youtu.be/csrk1gOcRPU)

-   [Video of an untrained agent landing the rocket on the moon
    ](https://youtu.be/Jb_1M_E6ofE)

The basic DQN compared fairly well with the DDQN and the version with
two 64 neuron layers converged at episode 461:

![DDQN, 200000 experiences, NN(256,256), batch size 128, 1500 episodes,
learn every 4th step N/A](./docs/tex/figures/m5.png)

![DQN, 200000 experiences, NN(64,64), batch size 64, 629 episodes, learn
every 4th step N/A](./docs/tex/figures/m0.png)

The experiments showed that the network hidden layer width had a big
impact on the speed of converging but the depth not so much. In the
figure [3](#fig:3){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:3"} a rolling
average with the window 100 can be seen and it shows that the neural
network with only two hidden layers and 64 neurons per layer performs
the worst. Increasing depth and also width drastically improves
performance however also increases the computational complexity and it
seems that the width of 256 neurons gives the best performance.

![NN with too little neurons seem to converge too
late](./docs/tex/figures/nnwidth.png)

# Discussion

After the technical issues were resolved (more on this in the last
section) the problem was easily solved using the DDQN / DQN methods.
Using the trained agent to repeatedly land the rocket shows impressive
results and even when the landing is not perfect the rocket usually does
not end up crashing.

# Future Work

Since the Lunar Lander is not such a complex problem it would be
interesting to compare the deep RL methods to the simpler methods from
the family of the temporal difference algorithms and see how much faster
/ slower the deep learning approach converges compared to SARSA or the
Dyna-Q. What could also be interesting is to do a more extensive hyper
parameter tuning and determine what the best neural network architecture
is e.g. would a convolutional network or a duelling network perform
better.

# Personal Experience

The implementation was first written for TensorFlow and Keras which
performed poorly. The combination of TensorFlow / Keras and the
gymnasium library have no working combination on a M1 Macbook so the
training was performed on a remote computer in Jupyter Labs. However the
training process ran slow and consumed more memory with every episode
until it ran out of available memory. The only way the models could be
trained was to periodically dump the neural network weights as well as
the internal buffer state to disk and reload them after the process
crashed. In this way the training process picked up where it left off
and continued improving the model. The DQN agent in
[2](#fig:2){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:2"} was trained in 10
separate sessions over two days to reach roughly the episode 700, each
session ending in out of memory exception. After extensive debugging and
benchmarking every part of the agent including rewriting the replay
buffer several times between a pure numpy implementation and the dequeue
buffer there was one culprit left. There seems to be some undetermined
issue with the TensorFlow/Keras running on my hardware or a programming
mistake on my side. The TensorFlow/Keras neural network implementation
was replaced by Pytorch and the performance increased 100 fold. All the
experiments excluding the first one were subsequently run using the
Pytorch approach and are able to reach the episode 1500 under one hour.
Both implementations are included in the project.

# References {#references .unnumbered}

Sutton, R.S., Bach, F., and Barto, A.G., 2018. Reinforcement learning:
An introduction. Massachusetts: MIT Press Ltd.
